Assignment 4.1 Deliverables: Meal Preparation Planning Agent
===========================================================

Objective
---------
Build an interactive AI agent that uses the Planning Pattern to create meal
preparation plans from user preferences. The agent collects structured meal
details, passes them to a language model, and produces a practical plan with a
shopping list, cooking instructions, timing notes, serving tips, and optional
personalization.

1. Python Script
----------------
The meal preparation planning agent is implemented in the following files:

- src/meal_prep_planner/agent.py
- src/meal_prep_planner/main.py

agent.py defines the MealPrepPlannerAgent and the MealPreferences data structure.
It loads the shared OpenAI API key from the course .env file, formats user
preferences into a structured prompt, and asks the language model to generate a
meal preparation plan.

main.py provides the command-line interface. It supports both interactive input
and direct command-line arguments, such as:

python -m meal_prep_planner.main --meal-type "Dinner" --dietary "Vegetarian" --servings 2 --time 30 --allergies "None" --preferences "high protein"

2. Demo Output
--------------
The following output was produced by running the agent:

Command:

python -m meal_prep_planner.main --meal-type "Dinner" --dietary "Vegetarian" --servings 2 --time 30 --allergies "None" --preferences "high protein"

Output:

Generating your meal plan...

Generated meal preparation plan:

1. Meal Overview:
We will be preparing a high-protein vegetarian stir-fry comprising tofu, quinoa,
and an assortment of colorful veggies. This meal is packed with protein, fiber,
and essential vitamins, and can be cooked in under 30 minutes.

2. Shopping List with Quantities:
- Tofu (extra firm): 1 block
- Quinoa: 1 cup
- Red bell pepper: 1
- Yellow bell pepper: 1
- Broccoli: 1 small head
- Carrot: 1
- Soy Sauce: 3 tablespoons
- Sesame oil: 2 tablespoons
- Garlic: 2 cloves
- Spring onion: 2
- Salt and pepper to taste

3. Ingredient Alternatives for Allergies or Preferences:
If you prefer gluten-free, replace soy sauce with tamari. If you want to add
more protein, you can include tempeh or seitan instead of tofu.

4. Step-by-step Cooking Instructions:
- Start with pressing the tofu for 15-20 minutes to remove excess water. After
  pressing, cut it into cubes.
- While your tofu is pressing, rinse 1 cup of quinoa under cold water, then cook
  according to package instructions.
- Heat 1 tablespoon of sesame oil in a pan over medium heat. Add the tofu cubes
  and cook until browned on all sides. Remove from the pan and set aside.
- In the same pan, add another tablespoon of sesame oil. Add finely chopped
  garlic and saute until fragrant.
- Add chopped bell peppers, broccoli, and carrots. Stir-fry for 5-7 minutes
  until the vegetables are slightly tender.
- Return the tofu to the pan, and add cooked quinoa. Stir in soy sauce, and
  season with salt and pepper. Stir-fry everything together for another 2-3
  minutes.
- Garnish with chopped spring onions before serving.

5. Timing Plan:
- Pressing tofu: 15-20 minutes
- Cooking quinoa: 15 minutes
- Stir-frying tofu: 5 minutes
- Sauteing garlic and stir-frying vegetables: 7-10 minutes
- Combining everything: 2-3 minutes

6. Serving Tips:
Serve the stir-fry hot, garnished with spring onions. You can add a sprinkle of
sesame seeds or a dash of hot sauce for extra flavor.

7. Side Dish or Beverage Recommendations:
This high-protein vegetarian stir-fry goes well with a fresh side salad or a
bowl of miso soup. For beverages, try green tea or a chilled glass of white wine
for a perfect pairing.

3. Brief Write-Up
-----------------
The agent works by collecting structured meal planning details from the user,
including meal type, dietary preferences, number of servings, available cooking
time, allergies, and extra preferences. These details are stored in a
MealPreferences object and converted into a clear prompt for the language model.

The prompt instructs the model to act as a practical meal preparation assistant
and to produce a plan with specific sections: meal overview, shopping list,
ingredient alternatives, step-by-step cooking instructions, timing plan, serving
tips, and side dish or beverage recommendations.

This demonstrates the Planning Pattern because the agent takes a broad goal,
such as preparing dinner, and breaks it into smaller actionable parts. Instead
of producing a general suggestion, the agent creates an executable plan that a
user can follow from shopping through serving.

An important observation from this assignment is that planning patterns are
useful for most agents with a specific goal. When an agent is trying to complete
a defined task, structured inputs such as objectives, parameters, constraints,
and expected outputs help guide the model's reasoning. In this case, the
planning structure helped the agent tailor the meal plan to the user's diet,
serving size, time limit, and preference for high protein. This same pattern
could improve many specific-purpose agents, because it reduces vague responses
and encourages the model to produce practical, step-by-step outputs.

One challenge during development was making sure the prompt was specific enough
to produce a complete and useful meal plan. A vague prompt might only suggest a
recipe idea, but the assignment required a shopping list, cooking steps, timing
plan, and personalization. Another challenge was balancing structure with
flexibility, so the agent could support both required inputs and bonus features
without becoming difficult to use.

4. Evaluation Notes
-------------------

Completeness:
The agent collects the key details needed for meal planning: meal type, dietary
preferences, servings, cooking time, allergies, and extra preferences. The
generated output includes a meal overview, shopping list, ingredient
alternatives, cooking instructions, timing plan, serving tips, and side dish or
beverage recommendations.

Clarity:
The shopping list and instructions are easy to understand. The output is divided
into clear sections, and the cooking instructions are written as ordered,
actionable steps.

Interactivity:
The script supports an interactive mode that prompts the user for meal details.
It also supports command-line arguments for quick demo runs, which makes it easy
to test and capture output.

Bonus:
Personalization features were implemented. The agent accepts available cooking
time, allergies or ingredients to avoid, and extra preferences such as
high-protein meals. It also includes ingredient alternatives and side dish or
beverage recommendations.

5. Reflection Questions
-----------------------

Question 1: How does this agent use the Planning Pattern?

The agent uses the Planning Pattern by turning a general request into a
structured plan. It collects meal constraints, passes them to the model in a
clear format, and asks the model to break the task into shopping, preparation,
cooking, timing, and serving steps. This makes the output practical rather than
just descriptive.

Question 2: How does structured input improve the quality of the meal plan?

Structured input gives the model useful boundaries. The meal type, dietary
restriction, serving size, time limit, allergy information, and extra preference
all shape the final plan. This helps the model generate a meal that is more
relevant, feasible, and personalized.

Question 3: What improvements could make the agent more useful?

The agent could be improved by adding saved user profiles, weekly meal planning,
automatic grocery list export, budget limits, calorie or macro targets, and
pantry-aware planning. It could also ask follow-up questions when the user gives
incomplete details.

Question 4: How could this planning approach be extended to other tasks?

The same approach could be used for other specific-goal agents, such as travel
planning, study planning, fitness routines, event planning, project management,
or household task planning. In each case, the agent would collect structured
requirements, identify constraints, and generate an actionable step-by-step
plan.

